docs: install and running instance documentation (#2533)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/run/plugin.rst

================
Managing plugins
================

> Sopel is designed with plugins in mind: they add features, commands, and can
> do many things to make Sopel more useful or more fun to interact with on IRC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sopel is designed with plugins in mind: they add features/commands and can do
many things to make Sopel more useful or more fun to interact with on IRC.
```

> They are two mains type of plugins you can add:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are two main types of plugins you can add:
```

🇫🇷🇫🇷🇫🇷 😁

* single file plugins that you drop into a folder
* packaged plugins that you install with ``pip``

A plugin can have its own configuration section, and may generate files or use
the database.

.. note::

    Make sure to read the documentation for the plugins you install and use.

Adding plugins
==============

Install single file plugins
---------------------------

To add a single file plugin to your Sopel instance, you need to copy the file
into its ``plugins`` directory. Said directory is relative to the
:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.homedir` directory, which means
by default the plugin file should be copied into ``~/.sopel/plugins``.

.. note::

    Following the :doc:`systemd service example <service>`, if your homedir is
    ``/var/lib/sopel`` then your plugin directory is
    ``/var/lib/sopel/plugins``.

If there is no configuration to change for the plugin, you can directly start
(or restart) your bot and Sopel will load it automatically.

Install packaged plugins
------------------------

Plugin authors might also publish their works as packages; you can find them by
searching PyPI, or by using your favorite search engine to search for

> e.g. “sopel reminder plugin”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g. "sopel reminder plugin".
```

Smart-ass text editor you've got there. 🙃

Author: Probably a copy/paste of something else. I don't use/have smart editor replacement for quotes.

You can install these packages with ``pip``, the same way it is recommended to

> install Sopel. In that case, all you need is to install the plugin for the same
> Python interpreter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
install Sopel. All you need is to install the plugin for the same Python
interpreter.
```

> For example, you can install the remind plugin from the ``sopel-remind``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can install the ``remind`` plugin from the ``sopel-remind``
```

Alternative:

```suggestion
For example, you can install the "remind" plugin from the ``sopel-remind``
```

package::

    python3 -m pip install sopel-remind

> This will install the plugin from pypi where you can see `all the releases`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will install the plugin from PyPI where you can see `all the releases`__
```

of this package.

.. note::

>     Each plugin can have specific steps or system dependencies you need to take
>     care of to install it. Refer to the plugin's documentation for more
>     details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Each plugin can have specific system dependencies or other requirements
    that you need to take care of when installing it. Refer to the plugin's
    documentation for more details.
```

.. __: https://pypi.org/project/sopel-remind/

Enabling or disabling plugins
=============================

By default, any plugins that Sopel can load will be automatically enabled: it
is true for all types of plugins (built-in, single file, or packaged plugins).
You can control this behavior by disabling some plugins, or enabling only some
plugins.

You can disable a plugin by using the ``sopel-plugins disable`` command line,

> e.g. to disable the remind plugin mentionned before::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g. to disable the remind plugin mentioned before::
```

You can disable a plugin by using the ``sopel-plugins disable`` command line,
e.g. to disable the remind plugin mentioned before::

    sopel-plugins disable remind

This will add the plugin to the
:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.exclude` list. The next time the
bot starts (or restarts), the plugin won't be loaded.

You can re-enable a plugin by using the ``sopel-plugins enable`` command line,
e.g. to re-enable the remind plugin::

    sopel-plugins enable remind

Which will remove the plugin from the ``exclude`` list. The plugin will be
loaded as before the next time the bot starts (or restarts).

Enable-only plugins
-------------------

By default, all plugins are enabled, and you disable plugins one by one.
However, you may want to enable only a set of plugins, and disable every other
one by default.

To do so, the enable command has a ``--allow-only`` option: this will add the
plugin to the :attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.enable` list::

    sopel-plugins enable --allow-only remind

When you start the bot (or restart), the bot will load the plugins from the
``enable`` list, and **only these plugins**.

Configuring plugins
===================

> A plugin can define a configuration section so you can configure its behavior.
> If the plugin supports it, you may be able to use the configuration wizard to
> edit the configuration of the plugin::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some (but not all!) plugins define their own configuration sections so you can
configure their behavior. If a plugin supports it, you may be able to use the
configuration wizard to edit the configuration of the plugin::
```

Author: I like your version better.

    sopel-plugins configure remind

> Alternatively, you can edit your configuration file and follow the plugin's
> documentation to set the appropriate options and values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can edit your configuration file and follow the plugin's
documentation to set the appropriate options and values. Here's an
example configuration of the `sopel-remind plugin`__, which defines the
``[remote]`` section for its own use:

.. __: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel-remind

```

Reviewer: Nit nit: `sopel-remind` defines the `[remind]` section for its own use, not the `[remote]` section.

Author: I'm not sure we should add a link on "sopel-remind". Or maybe a link to the [pypi's release page](https://pypi.org/project/sopel-remind/) and not the github one, as it is a plugin that should be installed through pip.

Reviewer: `extlinks` extension can make PyPI links easy, btw. Think <tt>:pypi:\`packagename\`</tt>.

Since the last top-level reply from @Exirel mentions needing to rebase, you'll get the newly enabled `extlinks` extension out of it as a silver lining (both the `configuration.rst` conflict and the new extension landed on `master` from #2550).

.. code-block:: INI

    [core]
    # Sopel core's section

    [remind]
    # remind's section
    location = /path/to/remind/location

> When you start the bot (or restart), the bot will load the new configuration
> file. Until the bot is restarted, the modification won't take effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sopel must be restarted after making changes to the configuration file.
```

.. __: https://pypi.org/project/sopel-remind/

Enabling or disabling plugins
=============================

By default, any plugins that Sopel can load will be automatically enabled: it
is true for all types of plugins (built-in, single file, or packaged plugins).
You can control this behavior by disabling some plugins, or enabling only some
plugins.

You can disable a plugin by using the ``sopel-plugins disable`` command line,
e.g. to disable the remind plugin mentioned before::

    sopel-plugins disable remind

This will add the plugin to the
:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.exclude` list. The next time the
bot starts (or restarts), the plugin won't be loaded.

You can re-enable a plugin by using the ``sopel-plugins enable`` command line,
e.g. to re-enable the remind plugin::

    sopel-plugins enable remind

Which will remove the plugin from the ``exclude`` list. The plugin will be
loaded as before the next time the bot starts (or restarts).

Enable-only plugins
-------------------

By default, all plugins are enabled, and you disable plugins one by one.
However, you may want to enable only a set of plugins, and disable every other
one by default.

> To do so, the enable command has a ``--allow-only`` option: this will add the
> plugin to the :attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.enable` list::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``enable`` command has an ``--allow-only`` option. For example, to add the
``remind`` plugin to the :attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.enable`
list, you would use this command line::
```

    sopel-plugins enable --allow-only remind

When you start the bot (or restart), the bot will load the plugins from the
``enable`` list, and **only these plugins**.

> 

Reviewer: Disclaimer up front: This might be too much detail. An alternative would be mentioning the `-a` switch as a shortcut to typing out the whole `--enable-only` name all the time.

```suggestion

.. note::

    You only need to use the ``--enable-only`` option once. If the ``enable``
    list is not empty, ``sopel-plugins enable`` and ``sopel-plugins disable``
    will add and remove plugins in that list.

```

Configuring plugins
===================

> Some (but not all!) plugins define their own configuration sections so you can
> configure their behavior. If a plugin supports it, you may be able to use the
> configuration wizard to edit the configuration of the plugin::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some (but not all!) plugins define their own configuration sections so you can
configure their behavior. If a plugin supports it, you may be able to use the
configuration wizard to do this::
```

(It's just simpler. Too much "configur{e|ation)" in the paragraph before. 😅)

    sopel-plugins configure remind

Alternatively, you can edit your configuration file and follow the plugin's
documentation to set the appropriate options and values. Here's an
example configuration of the `sopel-remind plugin`__, which defines the
``[remind]`` section for its own use:

.. __: https://pypi.org/project/sopel-remind/

.. code-block:: INI

    [core]
    # Sopel core's section

    [remind]
    # remind's section
    location = /path/to/remind/location

> Sopel must be restarted after making changes to the configuration file.

Reviewer: This is one that you should feel free to reject. I just felt while reading the deploy preview that this lonely line of text below a code-block is easy to miss, visually, and the admonition styling would help.

```suggestion
.. important::

    Sopel must be restarted after making changes to the configuration file.

```
